---
title: "Why I'm not excited by crypto-music"
date: "2023-01-07"
draft: true
---

I'm still trying to get my head around the whole excitement about NFTs, web3 music and things like that. Especially when renowned artists like Holly Herndon and other people I revere spoke out in favour of web3 music, I imagined there to be some new and clandestine communities of artists forming, some place on the internet with exciting new music that I don't yet know about. So I checked [some of](https://beta.catalog.works/) [the several](https://audius.co/) [web3 music platforms](https://wavv.app/) out there to see what I'll discover. There was some good stuff - like Torn Hawk's or J. Albert's releases via [Nina](https://www.ninaprotocol.com/), or the [Ghostly International](https://ghostly.com) NFTs on [Catalog](https://beta.catalog.works) -, but most of the things sounded really mediocre and a lot of the artwork there didn't resonate with me all. (To be fair, when I check the artworks and releases on alternative Web 2.0 streaming services like [Resonate.coop](https://stream.resonate.coop/discover) I don't get the feeling I'm in for some top-notch contemporary avant-garde sound design treats. Maybe these places just lack curation and some sort of Bandcamp Daily-like section.) It might not be the time yet to expect some new and exciting music collectives and subcultures (think NON Worldwide) to emerge from the web3 scene.

On the other hand, as David Greenstein pointed out in [an interview](https://interdependence.fm/episodes/experiments-in-revaluing-music-with-david-greenstein-soundxyz) platforms like the one he runs - sound.xyz - are really more thought of as an additional place to engage with artists and their rather than being a seperated, detached space. Which means that most of the music you'll find there, will also be on Bandcamp, Soundcloud and the likes and releasing a song as an NFT seldomly means that you wanna go all "Once Upon a Time in Shaolin" and make your music rare. Apparently, the idea is that you offer additional ways to show your favourite artists appreciation, enable some forms of interactions etc. and give artists new means to live off their artistic works, when streaming revenues and royalties are just not fairly distributed.

Which is surely a good thing. But i'm a little deterred, when I go to these music NFT platforms and so on and the first thing I read is about sales, monetization, digital tokens and assets etc. I mean, creating news ways of getting artists paid is surely a good thing, but I'd be disappointed if that's the main motivation for going to some website or service and check someone's music. I'm pretty sure that some time ago the slogan on their website was something like: "Decentraland is a place where you can trade digital real estate... Oh right, and you can play some games." And I get the same vibe from these web3 music platforms. I guess most of them have good intentions to help artists etc., but when I engage myself with some artists' works I prefer not to view them first and foremost as a business.

Plus, I miss the excitement of MySpace/tumblr days, when fan-artist interaction could be super direct. (There's some potential on Instagram, where it's very easy to connect with artists and get a DM from them and stuff.)

[...]

<!--
First time I got in touch with the concept of NFTs was through this episode of the Intelligence Squared podcast: [NFT's and Why Blockchain Means Business, with Sheila Warren and Carl Miller](https://harkaudio.com/p/intelligence-squared-business-intelligence-squared/nfts-and-why-blockchain-means-business-with-sheila-warren-and-carl-miller-intelligence-squared-1616174678000). The general idea of having nw means for artists to monetize their work was quite intriguing to me and even though I didn't really have an idea of what these digital assets might look like and what ther value will eventually be based on, concepts like "creator earnings" (when the original creator of an NFT gets some percentage of every resale of the NFT) seemed quite innovative.
 -->

<!-- Same with DApps. Some time ago, I invested a little bit of money in ETH, because I thought with a bit of crypto in my wallet, I'll have access to an exciting pool of decentralized apps. In the end, I didn't transfer the ETH from the crypto exchange to my crypto wallet, because the fees were ridiculous (they were higher than the crypto money I actually had). I checked what DApps are out there anyway and it turned out that things aren't that exciting after all. For the largest part, these DApps are just applications for borrowing and lending interest in cryptocurrencies or for buying and selling NFTs. Then there's some play-to-earn games and platforms, but these look rather uninspired to me and just went to show that the whole crypto sphere isn't really that exciting parallel universe where new creative minds get together to create something for the future. The commodification and the generating of value out of nothing tangible are still the driving forces behind most of what is happening in the crypto world. -->

In [S02E34 of the Future Histories podcast](https://www.futurehistories.today/episoden-blog/s02/e34-tante-zu-crypto-imaginaries-und-alternativen-technologischen-infrastrukturen/) tante argues that there definitely are well-intentioned people in the cryto and web3 sphere that care for compensating artists in a fair manner and are genuinely interested in creating viable alternatives to current models, but is skeptical about the idea that some a new technology (like DAOs or NFTs) coming along will solve all these issues. That idea kind of matches the vibe I sometimes get from the Interdependence podcast, that often times sounds too salvific in its favouring of web3 technologies. I'm sure Herndon and Dryhurst see the bigger political problem that lies behind the issues of compensating artistic labour. (...) Which is why I wonder, why talking about web3 is getting so much airtime on their podcast. Sure, there might be some artists that can profit from going crypto, selling NFTs etc., but I'm skeptical that there will be a critical mass of web3 artists anytime soon to make a fundamental change to our current models of consuming music. I'd love to hear more on that, instead of being told [that artists should all just watch some tutorial videos on web3 and get started with it](https://interdependence.fm/episodes/the-state-of-streaming-crypto-and-perpetual-musical-nostalgia-with-david-turner-penny-fractions).

So when Holly Herndon and Mat Dryhurst are voucing for crypto and web3 and Smart Contracts and all that on their podcast, I totally see their point and I get what they mean, when they say that this a chance for musicians for better compensations or giving value to their art and that whole new kinds of networks and infrastructures are now possible and one shouldn't miss out on it. I understand why they pay some attention and see all this potential, but I still don't share the excitement and I don't get the feeling that this is the start of something new here. In fact, this _web3 x music_ thing seems pretty doomed to me already, just I don't see the web3 becoming more attractive to a broad audience. I guess it's always gonna be this place for gamblers, investors, tekkies and a very small perentage of well-intended people that care about art. And maybe that small percentage is worth it, but really doesn't feel like my kind of party.

## further readings

[I don’t know who needs to hear this, but Nina Protocol is a sketchy NFT platform](https://medium.com/@collegehill/i-dont-know-who-needs-to-hear-this-but-nina-protocol-is-a-sketchy-nft-platform-b7af5185e2cf)
