---
title: "Think twice about using the word 'martyr' these days"
date: "2024-05-15"
draft: false
---

Some days ago, I was at a show of NYC-based noise band Deli Girls in Leipzig and got kind of distressed by their performance. Apparently, in the run-up to their performance they were confronted with their pro-Palestinian stance and the fact that slogans like 'Free Palestine' won't go down too well in the venue they are gonna play at. I recognise the band's political stance and also think that such slogans can be used productively in the right contexts. However, I found the band's performance problematic in several respects, as I pointed out to them in an email. One point related to an exclamation from the band during the concert, where the front person asked for 'a moment of silence for the martyrs'. This invocation was not contextualised and everyone had to make up their own mind about who the supposed martyrs were. Others later tried to explain to me why it was difficult to criticise the use of the term 'martyrs' because there were various victims on the Israeli and Palestinian side in the course of 7 October 2023 and the latter in particular are given recognition with this term.

I feel a bit like stating the obvious, but in the course of the debates and arguments regarding the current war in the Middle East, I keep seeing shifts in discourse and the boundaries of what can be said are being shifted, too, so that terms such as 'martyr' are being positively revalued and used again. In my opinion, however, what lies behind the use of the term is a glorification of the deaths of civilian and non-civilian Palestinian victims. They could just as well be described as victims of war and that would do justice to the suffering of the people. By using the term 'martyr', however, an attempt is made to give meaning to people's deaths and I think it then sounds as if one is saying, 'after all, these people died _for something_', in the sense of 'for a good cause'. What this _good cause_ is supposed to be, however, no one has yet explained to me and I can only assume that what is meant is: the attack on Israel on 7 October 2023 - in the form of Israeli civilians, kep in mind - was necessary and without alternative and was somehow worth the death of the people. The Palestinian victims would then be martyrs for the purported just cause of the war against Israel. I find such an idea highly problematic and disturbing. However, I can't read this statement from Deli Girls any other way. I didn't receive any response to the email I wrote to the band either, except that the band allegedly shared it in an Instagram story and criticised it superficially, but in this story didn't really respond to my line of criticism as far as I'm aware. And I didn't expect them to as I'm just another guy challenging their opinions and they can care less about me. But I think it is important to question and denounce certain shifts in discourse and the use of terms when they are inappropriate as is the case with the word 'martyr' here.

By ascribing the term 'martyr' to the Palestinian victims of 7 October 2023 and the subsequent war, one falls prey to the ideology of Hamas and relativises or normalises its militant Islamist ideology, as Helga Baumgarten recently did in the [Jung-&-Naiv-Interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VhzPaOsYmbM) when she claimed that the 2017 version of the Hamas charter shows a moderation and a turning away from the will to annihilate Jews, when even in this revision of the charter there is still an open call for jihad. In view of this, how can the term 'martyr' be understood in any other way than that the people it refers to are heroic victims of Hamas' cause? Even if the Deli Girls or other pro-Palestinian activists would not subscribe to this, in this context the term 'martyr' clearly has this connotation.
