---
title: "Witold Gombrowicz: Opętani (1939)"
date: "2025-07-22"
draft: false
tags:
  - book review
---

Somehow I feel like a fool for having read this book in its entirety instead of simply watching a few episodes of »Scooby-Doo«, which could certainly have provided more thrill and excitement. I feel betrayed, too, because I liked the idea of checking out [another](https://infinitejest.wallacewiki.com/david-foster-wallace/index.php?title=Main_Page) great Tennis-themed novel.

If Paul Kalinine's afterword to the German edition is to be believed, »Opętani« is Gombrowicz's take on the _roman noir_ (although the setting of the novel is closer to _gothic horror_ than _crime fiction_) and Gombrowicz plays with the building bricks of this genre here. However, the deliberate use of the genre's stereotypes and tropes does not save the novel from being _pulp fiction_ itself. I would even go so far as to say that this Gombrowicz's second novel even lags behind the _pulp fiction_ genre due to the rare occurrences of shock and horror moments and overall tediousness. One would think that since the work appeared as a serialized novel in two Polish newspapers, Gombrowicz would be able to maintain a level of suspense, and indeed there are a few good cliffhangers. But instead of captivating over the length of the book, the author constantly tries to conjure up something that the characters and the story he is telling do not offer. The story remains too underdeveloped, but by constantly insisting on suddennesses - suddenly his facial features changed, all of a sudden he had a change of heart, unexpectedly he said this and that - the narrator tries to evoke fascination.

»Opętani«tells the story of an bourgeois lady (in decline) named Maja and the new tennis instructor - Leszczuk - on her estate, who are caught up in a strange dynamic of attraction and repulsion, through which they seem to be in danger of falling into madness. It's a constellation that is enigmatically linked to the nearby Mysłocz Castle and its owner, an equally maniac prince. It seems like Gombrowicz wanted to create a Dostoevsky-like story about madness, morality and society here. With a great deal of benevolence, one can also interpret this novel as an examination of class relations. However, the novel offers extremely few interpretative approaches and most of the pages of the book consist of pure storytelling, with little to no theoretical or poetic underpinning. Possibly it'S due to the German translation (by Klaus Staemmler) in which I read the book, but I found virtually not a single interesting sentence in the book. Instead, the book is written all too redundantly and certain tropes recur again and again, such as the aforementioned fickleness of the two main characters, which Gombrowicz tries to convey to the reader in ever new phrases, but rarely adds new dimensions to his characters that would not be predictable. The metaphysical elements, which move the novel in the direction of _gothic horror_, are also sparse and mainly limited to a sort of third main character: a strangely pulsating towel at Mysłocz Castle, which nobody dares to approach because a demonic force seems to emanate from it. This _MacGuffin_, which is brought out again and again, eventually becomes ridiculous to the point of being annoying and the resolution of its strange power is pretty bland - as is the whole book. After 300 pages we are fobbed off with a vague morale: that the human approach to the world always consists of fantasy and rationality at the same time and then something about the infallibility of the human character. A conclusion that perhaps arises from the dynamics between the book's characters, if the reader manages to build up any interest in them instead of questioning the practice of fiction writing in general because of this book, as I did.
